.\"
.ig
Copyright (C) 2012-2018 Pierre Jean Fichet
<pierrejean dot fichet at posteo dot net>

Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
..
.\" DA Pierre-Jean Fichet
.\" DS Utroff u-ref manual
.\" DT Utroff u-ref manual
.\" DK utroff u-ref utmac refer iso-690 troff nroff heirloom tmac xml
.
.
.
.TH U-REF 7 2018-04-14
.
.
.
.SH NAME
.PP
\fBU-ref\fR: Format references for the U troff macros.
.
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The \fIu-ref\fR macro manage references in \fIrefer\fR
format for the \fIU troff macros\fR set (\fIutmac\fR).
\fIu-ref\fR has high level built-in capabilities:
.IP \(bu
It formats the bibliography following the \fIiso-690\fR
bibliography standart which defines a lot of fields, and which
fix the order on which they must appear.
.IP \(bu
It formats differently footnotes references and bibliography
list to increase readability.
.IP \(bu
It replaces yet cited references by "\fIIdem.\fR" or "\fIop.
cit. hereinbefore\fR" or "\fIop. cit. p xx.\fR", depending
if the references has been cited just before, in the same
page, or in the page \fIxx\fR of the document. If only the
heading (\fB%h\fR field) or or the page (\fB%p\fR field) of
the reference differ, they are simply written after these
replacement strings.
.IP \(bu
It builds an index of references that can be printed with
the \fB.AR\fR macro.
.PP
\fIu-ref\fR use a new version of \fIrefer\fR instead of the
original \fIheirloom refer\fR to handle correctly the
\fBIso-690\fR bibliography standart.
.
.
.
.SH USAGE
.
.
.
.SS Macros
.RS 3
.PP
The following macro can be used by the user:
.TP
\&\fBAB\fR \fIfile.ref\fR
Print a bibliography list of the file \fIfile.ref\fR.
.TP
\&\fBAR\fR
Print an index of references.
.TP
\&\fBRI\fR
Reverse usage of \fIIdem\fR in reference. The first call of this
macro will remove the usage of \fIIdem\fR, so the reference
will never be replaced by "\fIidem\fR". Default is to
replace all informations similar to the previous reference.
.TP
\&\fBRO\fR
Reverse usage of \fIop. cit.\fR in reference. The first call of this
macro will remove the usage of \fIop. cit.\fR, so the reference
will never be replaced by "\fIop. cit.\fR".
Default is to replace issuer, city and date by \fIop. cit.
p. xx\fR if the same reference appears before in the text.
.TP
\&\fBRN\fR
Reverse usage of notes in reference. The first call of this
macro will remove the usage of the note to print references,
but use the \fBPQ\fR macro to print them in the text.
Default is to enclose all references with \fBNS\fR and
\fBNE\fR to print them as a notes.
.
.
.
.SS Example
.RS 3
.IP \(bu
Use the \fB.[\fR and \fB.]\fR \fIrefer\fR macro to insert
the reference. The first line following the \fB.[\fR macro
must contain words to find the correct reference. Following
lines can contain fields definition.
.IP \(bu
Since \fIu-ref\fR write the reference in a note by
default, you must add the \fB\e**\fR string to insert,
where appropriate, a note number in the text.
.IP \(bu
Since the note number is inserted manually, you should use the
bare mode of \fIrefer\fR (the \fB-b\fR option), so that the
\fIrefer\fR command line is on the form: \fBrefer -b -p
file.ref\fR.
.PP
.EX
He said: «a short citation\fB\e**\fR».
\fB.\fR\fB[\fR
Keywords...
%p 3
\fB.\fR\fB]\fR
.EE
.
.
.
.SH FIELDS
.PP
\fIu-ref\fR use uppercase and lowercase fields. The
conventional meaning of each field is as follows:
.TP
\&\fBA\fR
The name of an author. If the name contains a title such as
\fIJr.\fR at the end, it should be separated from the last
name by a comma. There can be multiple occurrences of the
\fBA\fR field. The order is significant. It is a good idea
always to supply an \fBA\fR field or a \fBQ\fR field.
.TP
\&\fBB\fR
For an article that is part of a book, the title of the book.
.TP
\&\fBC\fR
The place (city) of publication.
.TP
\&\fBD\fR
The date of publication. The year should be specified in
full. If the month is specified, the name rather than the
number of the month should be used. It is a good idea
always to supply a \fBD\fR field; if the date is unknown, a
value such as \fIin press\fR or \fIunknown\fR can be used.
.TP
\&\fBE\fR
For an article that is part of a book, the name of an editor
of the book. For a serie of journals, the responsable of
the serie. For a serie of books, the responsable of the
serie.
Refer man page say that where the work has editors and no
authors, the names of the editors should be given as \fBA\fR
fields and \fI(ed)\fR or \fI(eds)\fR should be appended to
the last author. On the one hand this might be a good idea
for sorting purpose and to be sure that the name of the
editor appear before the title of the book, but on the other
end, the standart says that \fIed\fR should be written
without parenthesis, thing that might be confusing for
\fIrefer\fR. You should try both solution and choose the
best one in each situation.
.TP
\&\fBF\fR
Internally used by \fIrefer\fR: the number of the reference.
It must should be defined by user.
.TP
\&\fBG\fR
For a book, the ISBN (International Standard Book Number).
For a Journal, the ISSN (International Standard Serial Number).
.TP
\&\fBH\fR
Information about the publication: first edition, french
edition, etc.
.TP
\&\fBh\fR
Heading of the section of the book where the citation appears.
.TP
\&\fBI\fR
The publisher (issuer).
.TP
\&\fBJ\fR
Defines a periodical publication:
For an article in a journal, the name of the journal.
For a journal from a serie, the name of the journal.
For a serie of journals, the name of the serie.
.TP
\&\fBK\fR
Keywords used for searching. This field is required by
\fIu-ref\fR to replace citations by \fIIdem.\fR and co. It
must be defined for \fIu-ref\fR to work properly, and
should contain only ascii characters.
.TP
\&\fBL\fR
Label. Not used by \fIu-ref\fR.
.TP
\&\fBM\fR
The collection in which the reference is published.
.TP
\&\fBN\fR
Journal issue number.
.TP
\&\fBO\fR
Other information.
This is usually printed at the end of the reference, before
the field G. It's the place to mention the support of an
electronic document (e-mail, pdf, html...)
.TP
\&\fBP\fR
\fBTotal\fR number of page of the book.
.TP
\&\fBp\fR
Exact page of the citation, or position of the article in a
book. A range of pages can be specified as
\fBm−n\fR.
.TP
\&\fBQ\fR
The name of the author, if the author is not a person. This
will only be used if there are no \fBA\fR fields. There can
only be one \fBQ\fR field.
.TP
\&\fBR\fR
Technical or scientific report number.
.TP
\&\fBS\fR
Series name.
.TP
\&\fBT\fR
Title. For an article in a book or a journal, this should
be the title of the article.
.TP
\&\fBU\fR
Co-author (translator, illustrator...). Should be preceded
by its function:
\fItr.\fR
for a translator, etc.
.TP
\&\fBV\fR
For a book in a serie, the volume number of that book.
For a whole serie, the number of books in that serie.
.TP
\&\fBw\fR
Type (\fBw\fRhich) of an electronic document (online,
CD-ROM...)
.TP
\&\fBX\fR
Annotation.
.TP
\&\fBx\fR
URL of an online document.
\fIu-ref\fR
doesn't have macro to hyphenate correctly urls. In you
bibliography database, you should use the special character
\fB\e:\fR
to tell troff where to hyphenate the url, for example like
this:
.PP
.EX
%x http:\fB\e:\fR//\fB\e:\fRexample.\fB\e:\fRcom/
.EE
.TP
\&\fBy\fR
Update date of an electronic document.
.TP
\&\fBz\fR
Date of last access to an electronic document.
.PP
For all fields except \fBA\fR and \fBE\fR, if there is more
than one occurrence of a particular field in a record, only
the last such field will be used.
.
.
.
.SH FILES
.PP
\fB@MACDIR@/u-ref\fR, the macro file.
.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
Iso-690 bibliography standart,
utmac(7),
refer(1),
referformat(7).
.PP
Rossitza Kyheng wrote an overview of the iso-690 bibliography
stanadart in an online french article:
\&La référence bibliographique, normes et praxis <http//www.revue-texto.net/Reperes/Themes/Kyheng_References.html>.
.
.
.
.SH LICENSE
.PP
\fIu-ref\fR macro and this manual page are distributed under
an
isc license.
.
.
.
.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Pierre-Jean Fichet.
