.\"
.ig
Copyright (C) 2012-2018 Pierre Jean Fichet
<pierrejean dot fichet at posteo dot net>

Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
..
.\" DA Pierre-Jean Fichet
.\" DS Utroff utmac hacker manual
.\" DT Utroff utmac hacker manual
.\" DK utroff utmac u-ref troff
.
.
.
.TH UTMAC-HACK 7 2020-06-09
.
.
.
.SH FILES
.PP
The following files are installed on the directory
@MACDIR@: \fB@TMAC@\fR.
.TP
\&\fIuh, ul, us, ut, uw, ux\fR
Layout macros.
.TP
\&\fIu-ref\fR
Format a refer bibliography. See
u-ref(7).
.TP
\&\fIu-grind\fR
Handle the \fIugrind\fR pre-processor.
.TP
\&\fIu-idx\fR
Index macros.
.TP
\&\fIu-links\fR
Macros for links.
.TP
\&\fIu-pdf\fR
Handles pdf links and metadatas.
.TP
\&\fIu-eps\fR
Include eps files in a document.
.TP
\&\fIu-sum\fR
Creates summaries.
.TP
\&\fIu-var\fR
Defines various macros shared by all utmac files.
.TP
\&\fIu-en\fR \fIu-fr\fR
Localization macros, for english and french. They should be
loaded by the file defined by the \fBUTMAC\fR environment
variable. If the \fBUTMAC\fR environment variable is not
defined, english is loaded.
.TP
\&\fIu-font\fR
Font macros shared by all font files.
.TP
\&\fIu-apolline\fR, \fIu-libertine\fR, \fIu-biolinum\fR, \fIu-biolib\fR
Mount the specified font. By default,
\fIu-libertine\fR is loaded.
.
.
.
.SH TESTS
.PP
Once loaded, each macro file sets the register \fBtmac-\fR\fIname\fR
(where \fIname\fR is the file name) to '1'. This register can be used
within tests to adapt the content on the macro used to format the
document:
.PP
.EX
\fB.\fR\fBie\fR \fB\e\en[tmac-ux]\fR This is printed if formatted with -mux.
\fB.\fR\fBel\fR This is printed otherwise.
.EE
.PP
.
.
.
.SH NAMING CONVENTIONS
.PP
\fIUtmac\fR use some convention to name macro, strings, and
number register. Internally, files are divided in modules,
and the naming conventions are as follow:
.IP \(bu
The name of the macros are of the form
\fBmodule:name\fR.
.IP \(bu
The name of the strings and number registers are of the form
\fBmodule-name\fR.
.PP
Externally, all macro contain two uppercase letters,
while all fonts are strings containing one uppercase letter.
.PP
So, \fIutmac\fR reserve the following names:
.IP \(bu
Names containing the characters \fB:\fR and \fB-\fR.
.IP \(bu
Names containing one or two uppercase letters.
.
.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
utmac(7),
u-ref(7),
postxml(1),
idx(1),
refer(1).
.
.
.
.SH LICENSE
.PP
\fIUtmac\fR macros and this manual page are distributed under
an
isc license
.
.
.
.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Pierre-Jean Fichet.
